 
	 

Holy Bible

New International Version








About the New International Version ¨C 
The New International Version was undertaken by an independent committee in after a general consensus that there was a need for a new, contemporary English translation of the Bible.

With the help of scholars from all over the world, and multiple reviews from a committee of multiple denominations, the New International Version has earned the widespread respect of all Christians as one of the best translations available.
Old Testament
Genesis
Exodus
Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy
Joshua
Judges
Ruth
1st Samuel
2nd Samuel
1st Kings
2nd Kings
1st Chronicles
2nd Chronicles
Ezra
Nehemiah
Esther
Job
Psalms
Proverbs
Ecclesiastes
Song of Solomon
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Lamentations
Ezekiel
Daniel
Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
New Testament
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Acts
Romans
1st Corinthians
2nd Corinthians
Galatians
Ephesians
Philippians
Colossians
1st Thessalonians
2nd Thessalonians
1st Timothy
2nd Timothy
Titus
Philemon
Hebrews
James
1st Peter
2nd Peter
1st John
2nd John
3rd John
Jude
Revelation











?

                                          Genesis
1
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. 
2Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters. 
3And God said, "Let there be light," and there was light. 
4God saw that the light was good, and he separated the light from the darkness. 
5God called the light "day," and the darkness he called "night." And there was evening, and there was morning-the first day. 
6And God said, "Let there be an expanse between the waters to separate water from water." 
7So God made the expanse and separated the water under the expanse from the water above it. And it was so. 
8God called the expanse "sky." And there was evening, and there was morning-the second day. 
9And God said, "Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place, and let dry ground appear." And it was so. 
10God called the dry ground "land," and the gathered waters he called "seas." And God saw that it was good. 
11Then God said, "Let the land produce vegetation: seed-bearing plants and trees on the land that bear fruit with seed in it, according to their various kinds." And it was so. 
12The land produced vegetation: plants bearing seed according to their kinds and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good. 
13And there was evening, and there was morning-the third day. 
14And God said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to separate the day from the night, and let them serve as signs to mark seasons and days and years, 
15and let them be lights in the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth." And it was so. 
16God made two great lights-the greater light to govern the day and the lesser light to govern the night. He also made the stars. 
17God set them in the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth, 
18to govern the day and the night, and to separate light from darkness. And God saw that it was good. 
19And there was evening, and there was morning-the fourth day. 
20And God said, "Let the water teem with living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the sky." 
21So God created the great creatures of the sea and every living and moving thing with which the water teems, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. 
22God blessed them and said, "Be fruitful and increase in number and fill the water in the seas, and let the birds increase on the earth." 
23And there was evening, and there was morning-the fifth day. 
24And God said, "Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds: livestock, creatures that move along the ground, and wild animals, each according to its kind." And it was so. 
25God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the livestock according to their kinds, and all the creatures that move along the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good. 
26Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move along the ground." 
27So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them. 
28God blessed them and said to them, "Be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and over every living creature that moves on the ground." 
29Then God said, "I give you every seed-bearing plant on the face of the whole earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food. 
30And to all the beasts of the earth and all the birds of the air and all the creatures that move on the ground-everything that has the breath of life in it-I give every green plant for food." And it was so. 
31God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. And there was evening, and there was morning-the sixth day. 
2Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array. 
2By the seventh day God had finished the work he had been doing; so on the seventh day he rested from all his work. 
3And God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it he rested from all the work of creating that he had done. 
4This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created. When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens- 
5and no shrub of the field had yet appeared on the earth and no plant of the field had yet sprung up, for the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth and there was no man to work the ground, 
6but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the ground- 
7the Lord God formed the man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being. 
8Now the Lord God had planted a garden in the east, in Eden; and there he put the man he had formed. 
9And the Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground-trees that were pleasing to the eye and good for food. In the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. 
10A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters. 
11The name of the first is the Pishon; it winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. 
12(The gold of that land is good; aromatic resin and onyx are also there.) 
13The name of the second river is the Gihon; it winds through the entire land of Cush. 
14The name of the third river is the Tigris; it runs along the east side of Asshur. And the fourth river is the Euphrates. 
15The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it. 
16And the Lord God commanded the man, "You are free to eat from any tree in the garden; 
17but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat of it you will surely die." 
18The Lord God said, "It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for him." 
19Now the Lord God had formed out of the ground all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them; and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name. 
20So the man gave names to all the livestock, the birds of the air and all the beasts of the field. But for Adam no suitable helper was found. 
21So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was sleeping, he took one of the man's ribs and closed up the place with flesh. 
22Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib he had taken out of the man, and he brought her to the man. 
23The man said, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 'woman, ' for she was taken out of man." 
24For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and they will become one flesh. 
25The man and his wife were both naked, and they felt no shame. 
3Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say, 'You must not eat from any tree in the garden'?" 
2The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, 
3but God did say, 'You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.' " 
4"You will not surely die," the serpent said to the woman. 
5"For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil." 
6When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it. 
7Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves. 
8Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden. 
9But the Lord God called to the man, "Where are you?" 
10He answered, "I heard you in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid." 
11And he said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?" 
12The man said, "The woman you put here with me-she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I ate it." 
13Then the Lord God said to the woman, "What is this you have done?" The woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate." 
14So the Lord God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this, "Cursed are you above all the livestock and all the wild animals! You will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life. 
15And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel." 
16To the woman he said, "I will greatly increase your pains in childbearing; with pain you will give birth to children. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you." 
17To Adam he said, "Because you listened to your wife and ate from the tree about which I commanded you, 'You must not eat of it,' "Cursed is the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life. 
18It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of the field. 
19By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return." 
20Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the mother of all the living. 
21The Lord God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them. 
22And the Lord God said, "The man has now become like one of us, knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever." 
23So the Lord God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken. 
24After he drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden cherubim and a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life. 
4Adam lay with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain. She said, "With the help of the Lord I have brought forth a man." 
2Later she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil. 
3In the course of time Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the Lord . 
4But Abel brought fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock. The Lord looked with favor on Abel and his offering, 
5but on Cain and his offering he did not look with favor. So Cain was very angry, and his face was downcast. 
6Then the Lord said to Cain, "Why are you angry? Why is your face downcast? 
7If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at your door; it desires to have you, but you must master it." 
8Now Cain said to his brother Abel, "Let's go out to the field." And while they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him. 
9Then the Lord said to Cain, "Where is your brother Abel?" "I don't know," he replied. "Am I my brother's keeper?" 
10The Lord said, "What have you done? Listen! Your brother's blood cries out to me from the ground. 
11Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground, which opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand. 
12When you work the ground, it will no longer yield its crops for you. You will be a restless wanderer on the earth." 
13Cain said to the Lord , "My punishment is more than I can bear. 
14Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your presence; I will be a restless wanderer on the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me." 
15But the Lord said to him, "Not so ; if anyone kills Cain, he will suffer vengeance seven times over." Then the Lord put a mark on Cain so that no one who found him would kill him. 
16So Cain went out from the Lord 's presence and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden. 
17Cain lay with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Cain was then building a city, and he named it after his son Enoch. 
18To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael was the father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech. 
19Lamech married two women, one named Adah and the other Zillah. 
